# AppUsage
The purpose of this project is to explore different techniques for predicting demographic information of mobile phone users based on their installed or used apps.  A report of the results is available [here](https://github.com/jgartman/AppUsage/blob/master/project_report.pdf) and a summary is below.

## Summary

### Introduction
Typically a business may have access to information about a users consumption of a product but lacks any actual demographic information about the user themselves.  The ability to accurately predict demographic information based on behavoiral or consumption patterns would allow businesses to better target their goods and services.  Prior work has examined constructing models to predict the gender of mobile phone users based on the apps they install or frequently use.  One challenge faced by such models is that they often are very high dimensional which can leave them slow to train and prone to overfitting.  This project attempts to construct models that are effective but also low dimensional.  There are several analogies that can be drawn between this task and text classification.  Text classification methods are often based on constructing feature vectors of the words that appear in a document and then using these feature vectors for classification.

### Dataset
The studied dataset was released by Talking Data, a Chinese big data platform service. The dataset consists of 23309 unique users and was collected over a week long period in May 2016. The gender breakdown of the users is 8048 women and 15261 men. For each user there is one or more associated events. An event was recorded when an app on the users mobile device attempted to use a service provided by Talking Data. When an event occurred a list of apps installed on that users phone as well as a list of apps that were active during that event were sent to Talking Data. The events may not have been driven directly by user behavior but may instead have been caused by the users device connecting to a new wi-fi network or a running app making a background network request. There are 13762 unique installed apps of which 6942 were active for at least one user during at least one of that users events. The app names have been removed and replaced with unique id numbers but each app is associated with one or more labels. The labels give information about what general category an app belongs to. For example the most popular app in the dataset is app id #8693964245073640147 which was installed by 92.8% of all users. This app is associated with the labels ”Relatives” and ”IM” indicating it is likely a social media messaging app. In total there are 485 unique app labels and all were associated with an app that was active for at least one event for at least one user.

### Details of Approach
This project examines two classifaction models, Naive Bayes and Support Vector Machines.  For the Naive Bayes models, both binary and multinomial feature vectors are first constructed for each user based on both apps that they have installed and those they actually use.  This process is then repeated with the app labels instead of the individual apps since there are far fewer labels than apps.  In the case of SVM's binary feature vectors for the app labels were examined.  Many apps or app labels in the data set do not give much information about the users gender.  By removing these irrelevant features models can be more compact, easier to train, and, hopefully, give similar or improved generalization performance.  This is accomplished by calculating the mutual information scores between apps or app labels and gender.  The mutual information scores are used to select only the apps or app labels that give the most information about the users gender.

### Summary of Results
The best performing model was was the Bernoulli Naive Bayes model that only considered whether a user had installed a given app on their phone and ignored how many times it was used.  On a training set this model produced a ROC AUC score of .722. However, similar performace could be acheived by label based models with much lower dimensionality and models that considered only the 100 most informative app labels were able to achieve ROC AUC scores close to .700


